<!-- livebook:{"persist_outputs":true} -->

# Git

## Index
1. [Toc](./../toc.livemd)
2. [Contributing](./../contributing.livemd)
   1. [Understanding Any Module](./../contributing/understanding-any-module.livemd)
   2. [Writing Documents](./../contributing/writing-documents.livemd)
   3. [Git](./../contributing/git.livemd)
   4. [Hoon](./../contributing/hoon.livemd)
   5. [Iex](./../contributing/iex.livemd)
   6. [Observer](./../contributing/observer.livemd)
   7. [Testing](./../contributing/testing.livemd)
      1. [Running Tests](./../contributing/testing/running-tests.livemd)
      2. [Writing Tests](./../contributing/testing/writing-tests.livemd)
8. [Visualization](./../visualization.livemd)
   1. [Actors](./../visualization/actors.livemd)
4. [Hoon](./../hoon.livemd)
   1. [Calling](./../hoon/calling.livemd)
   2. [Dumping](./../hoon/dumping.livemd)
   3. [Setting Up](./../hoon/setting-up.livemd)
5. [Analysis](./../analysis.livemd)
6. [Vm_interface](./../vm_interface.livemd)

## Git

Git is a decent version control(VC) system, however there are ways to
make the VC process a lot smoother.

This document is best viewed from within liveview, as the charts do not render on github currently.

## Terminology

* `topic` - this is any branch that serves to fix some problem in the
  codebase

* `feature` - some new concept to the codebase. Many topics can serve
  to fulfill one feature.

* `release` - A release of the code. This is a git `tag` on `main`
  that signifies a new version of the software. This typically bumps
  base to the latest release as well

* `base` - the base branch one should base work off of

* `main` - sometimes called `master`, is the branch that prepares for
  a release.

* `next` - a branch that has a superset of features that will be
  included in the next release

* `maint` - a maintnance branch that will be updated if bugs are found

* `integreation branch` - a topic that merges a bunch of other topics

## Naming conventions

Name your topic like `name/feature` to avoid clashing with other
people's topics.

There are some standard branches that do not follow this pattern but
those are described in the `Terminology` section of this document

## General Principles

These are some general principles which should help maintainers easily
integrate your code, and have your work help out other devs on the
codebase.

<!-- livebook:{"branch_parent_index":4} -->

## Do not include unrelated changes into your commits

* For example, if you see some unrelated bug in the same file as your
  own, don't fix it in your general commit, make a new topic based on
  when the bug was introduced and merge that into your topic if it
  impacts your topic.

* This makes reviewing much easier as the reviewer can read your
  commit message and see changes only related to that included

<!-- livebook:{"branch_parent_index":4} -->

## Make topics early and often!

This allows your work to be incrementally integrated into a
release. If you put all your work into one topic, bug fixes and all,
then the following will occur

1. The changes will not be reviewed properly

   * On big projects with tight deadlines, sometimes some feature
     *X* is wanted. However if *X* is a single topic with a messy
     history, the only options are either to scrap the feature or
     accept it as is poor code in all.
   * If this was properly split up parts of *X* could be merged
     now, with the more controversial features being held up in
     *next*, without having to sacrifice the quality of the
     codebase.

2. Other team members can not share similar work

   * Often a lot of different tasks, may find the same
     deficiencies in the codebase.

   * For a real example, let's take the following commit and topic

     ```example
     802ab9e * anoma/mariari/nock-testing-file Move the helper functions
     73bfd7d * v0.3.0
      2 files changed, 44 insertions(+), 34 deletions(-)
     lib/test_helper/nock.ex | 43 +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
     test/nock_test.exs      | 35 +----------------------------------
     ```

     Here we find that we `mariari` moved some testing functions from
     `test/` to `lib/`, as elixir tests don't share code in the best
     way. This allows other files in `test/` to reuse the same
     functions that were previously found in `test/nock_test.exs`.  In
     fact there are multiple topics that ended up using this. Both the
     executor topic and worker topic

     * `8de0c7e anoma/mariari/worker`
       * `1d6bc99 anoma/mariari/executor`

     both needed this. Since the worker relies upon the executor,
     they both don't merge in this topic separately, but if they
     were separate they would want to share this change.

* If these changes were orchestrated by different people, then
  they would have made this change twice! Meaning that in the git
  history the work has been done in different commits! This means
  that when it comes time to merge in work, there will be a
  conflict between these two. Rather than being able to reuse
  other's work and save other devs time, this will come up when
  reviewers read the code, with unrelated changes, or when the
  maintainers try to merge things together and find annoying
  conflicts

1. Work can not be incrementally included
2. Others might just do the work before you

* If one is too slow on finishing their topic and making it one big
  commit, then someone else might redo the same work and put it up
  for review, but instead of them reusing your code, they wrote it
  from scratch, wasting both your time and their time.

<!-- livebook:{"branch_parent_index":4} -->

## Base topics on base

Basing code on `main` has the following errors:

1. Code merged in main before a release may turn out to have issues
2. Git merges and conflict resolutions lead to spurious base points
3. Other topics can not reuse your code
4. Useless temporal history is had

Basing on someone's topic that you require and will merge in anyways
is fine.

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

### Code merged in main before a release may turn out to have issues

Imagine main has the following history

```mermaid
%%{init:
{ 'logLevel': 'debug',
  'theme': 'forest',
  'gitGraph': {'showBranches': true,
               'showCommitLabel':true,
               'mainBranchName': 'base'}} }%%
gitGraph TB:
commit id: "73bfd7d" tag: "v0.3.0"
branch Topic-Y
commit id: "4381bd3"
checkout base
merge Topic-Y id: "52b44a6"
```

and your code hapens to be base on 52b44a6, then the history will look something like:

```mermaid
%%{init:
{ 'logLevel': 'debug',
  'theme': 'forest',
  'gitGraph': {'showBranches': true,
               'showCommitLabel':true,
               'mainBranchName': 'my-cool-feature'}} }%%
gitGraph TB:
commit id: "73bfd7d" tag: "v0.3.0"
branch Topic-Y
commit id: "4381bd3"
checkout my-cool-feature
merge Topic-Y id: "52b44a6: main merge feature-y"
commit id: "7dabf44"
```

Later before a release, we find out that *Topic-Y* has issues, and any
code that is based on *Topic-Y* will have to sit this release
out. Normally to check for this, the protocol is quite simple we just:

1. Do not include any topics that are based on *Topic-Y* or merges
   *Topic-Y* into the release
2. Pull any topic based on *Topic-Y* from `main`

becomes muddied, as if one's topic was based on `main` after *Topic-Y*
is in, then it's unclear if that topic is unaffected.

Thus *my-cool-feature* may be cut from the release, even if it was
perfectly fine and did not rely on *Topic-Y*.

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

### Git merges and conflict resolutions lead to spurious base points

Further, if we have two topics *my-feature-x* and *my-feature-y* based
on `main`, then the history would look something like this

```mermaid
%%{init:
{ 'logLevel': 'debug',
  'theme': 'forest',
  'gitGraph': {'showBranches': true,
               'showCommitLabel':true,
               'mainBranchName': 'base'}} }%%
gitGraph TB:
commit id: "73bfd7d" tag: "v0.3.0"
branch main
branch ray/mnesia-attach
commit id: "97bef7"
checkout main
merge ray/mnesia-attach id: "13b3e4a"


checkout base
branch proper-topic
commit id: "8087564: add a new feature"

checkout main
branch topic-x
commit id: "bc4b2a1: new cool feature"

checkout main
merge proper-topic id: "2dd991a"

checkout main
branch topic-y
commit id: "546a8f9: add feature: conflicts X!"

checkout main
merge topic-x id: "90d91e7"
merge topic-y id: "0438922"
```

In a textual form this looks like:

```
0438922 *   main Merge branch 'topic-y'
        |\
546a8f9 | * topic-y Added a feature that conflcits with X!
90d91e7 * |   Merge branch 'topic-x'
        |\ \
        | |/
        |/|
bc4b2a1 | * topic-x Added a cool feature
2dd991a * |   Merge branch 'proper-topic'
        |\ \
        | |/
        |/|
8087564 | * proper-topic Add a new feature
13b3e4a * |   Merge branch 'ray/mnesia-attach'
        |\ \
        | |/
        |/|
97b6ef7 | * ray/mnesia-attach mnesia:
        |/
73bfd7d * v0.3.0 base

```

When *topic-x* and *topic-y* have a conflict, the shared base of their base is

```bash
4 taichi@Gensokyo:~/Documents/Work/Repo/anoma-all git:main: % git merge-base topic-x topic-y
13b3e4a215ea6222a1b1092ad242d3fa31e7040b
```

which is `13b3e4a * | Merge branch 'ray/mnesia-attach'` and not
`73bfd7d * v0.3.0 anoma/base`, meaning that when a conflict is shown
in the merge `0438922`, then the diff from a 3 way diff will show the
mnesia changes, potentially making it unclear to others way the
potentially issues may be.

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

### Other topics can not reuse your code

It is a bad idea to base code on `main`, as `main` contains random
merged topics before a release. This makes it so other topics who wish
to use yours also has to merge all the random topics on `main`.

This is easy to see with the following example:

```mermaid
%%{init:
{ 'logLevel': 'debug',
  'theme': 'forest',
  'gitGraph': {'showBranches': true,
               'showCommitLabel':true,
               'mainBranchName': 'simple-config'}} }%%
gitGraph TB:
commit id: "73bfd7d: base" tag: "v0.3.0"
branch major-changes
commit id: "97bef7: structural changes"
checkout simple-config
merge major-changes id: "5b16844: merge into main"
commit id: "f098de0: general config"
```

Here we have a topic `major-changes` that makes all sorts of changes,
and since we based our code off main, these are all included in
simple-config-change.

However imagine we wish to overhaul the configuration a bit

```mermaid
%%{init:
{ 'logLevel': 'debug',
  'theme': 'forest',
  'gitGraph': {'showBranches': true,
               'showCommitLabel':true,
               'mainBranchName': 'configuration-upgrade'}} }%%
gitGraph TB:
commit id: "73bfd7d: base" tag: "v0.3.0"
commit id: "f098de0: Basic config changes"
```

Now if we wish to merge in `simple-config-change` we have

```mermaid
%%{init:
{ 'logLevel': 'debug',
  'theme': 'forest',
  'gitGraph': {'showBranches': true,
               'showCommitLabel':true,
               'mainBranchName': 'configuration-upgrade'}} }%%
gitGraph TB:
commit id: "73bfd7d: base" tag: "v0.3.0"

branch simple-config
checkout configuration-upgrade
branch major-changes
commit id: "97bef7: structural changes"

checkout configuration-upgrade
commit id: "f098de0: Basic config changes"

checkout simple-config
merge major-changes id: "5b16844: merge into main"
commit id: "f098de0: general config"

checkout configuration-upgrade
merge simple-config id: "f6230df"
```

Besides having a spurious main merged into our topic now, we are
forced to deal with `major-changes` causing various conflicts with
your topic, making this merge untenable.

Meaning that this code has to be recreated in `configuration-upgrade`
instead of reusing `simple-config-change`, fixing the problem in 2
places, and having a conflict when it comes time for a release.

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

### Useless temporal history is had

As we can see in the previous examples, when we base off of `main`, we
end up in a scenario, where the date in which someone is branching is
baked into the code. As maintainers we don't care about when the code
was made, just the fact that it was. Thus this is a bit of history
that simply adds noise

<!-- livebook:{"branch_parent_index":4} -->

## Merge other people's topics into yours

If you need some work that is already merged into `next` or `main`,
simply merge that topic into yours! Since the bases are well situated,
you will only deal with reasonable conflicts that you should have
context for.

<!-- livebook:{"branch_parent_index":4} -->

## Base bug fixes on the commit that introduced the bug

Basing a bug fix on when the bug is introduced is superior than basing
it on the latest release, as this means that it can be merged into any
`maint` branches we may have.

For example:

```
73bfd7d * v0.3.0 Anoma 0.3.0
...
10f8636 * v0.2.0 Anoma 0.2.0
...
34fcd78 * v0.1.0 Release v0.1.0
```

if a bug was found in a topic between `v0.1.0` and `v0.2.0`, and we
based it on when the bug was found we can merge it on `v0.2.0` and
have `v0.2.1` release from there. And have a `v0.3.1` release as well.

```
2373834 *   v0.2.1 Merge branch 'bug-fix' into HEAD
        |\
da24431 | * bug-fix fix bug
10f8636 * | v0.2.0 Anoma 0.2.0
```

```
19c6f03 *   v0.3.1 Merge branch 'bug-fix' into HEAD
        |\
da24431 | * bug-fix fix bug
73bfd7d * | v0.3.0 Anoma 0.3.0
```

notice how we can merge this in with no conflicts!
